readme.md, before:

ClassiCube is a custom Minecraft Classic and ClassiCube client written in C that works on Windows, macOS, Linux, Android, iOS, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, Solaris, Haiku, and in a web browser.<br>
**It is not affiliated with (or supported by) Mojang AB, Minecraft, or Microsoft in any way.**

![screenshot_n](http://i.imgur.com/FCiwl27.png)


You can download the game [from here](https://www.classicube.net/download/) and the very latest builds [from here](https://www.classicube.net/nightlies/).

## Information

#### What ClassiCube is
* A complete re-implementation of Minecraft Classic 0.30, with **optional** additions
* Lightweight, minimal memory usage compared to original Minecraft Classic
* Much better performance than original Minecraft Classic
* Works with effectively all graphics cards that support OpenGL or Direct3D 9

#### What ClassiCube isn't
* It does not work with Minecraft Java or Bedrock edition servers
* It does not have a survival mode (nor will such a mode be added)
* It does not reimplement Minecraft Classic versions before 0.30

#### System requirements
* Windows: 95 or later
* macOS: 10.5 or later (can be compiled to work with 10.3/10.4 though)
* Linux: libcurl and libopenal
* Android: 2.3 or later

**Note:** When running from within VirtualBox, disable Mouse Integration, otherwise the camera will not work properly

#### Instructions
Initially, you will need to run ClassiCube.exe to download the required assets from minecraft.net. 
Just click 'OK' to the dialog menu that appears when you start the launcher.

**Singleplayer**
Run ClassiCube.exe, then click Singleplayer at the main menu.

**Multiplayer**
Run ClassiCube.exe. You can connect to LAN/locally hosted servers, ~~minecraft.net servers,~~ and classicube.net servers through the launcher.

###### *Stuck with OpenGL 1.1 due to old graphics hardware?*
If you're on Windows, you should first try using the MESA software renderer from [here](http://download.qt.io/development_releases/prebuilt/llvmpipe/windows/). Typically though, this occurs because you have not installed GPU drivers.

Otherwise, you will have to [compile the game yourself](#using-visual-studio-command-line). Don't forget to add `-DCC_BUILD_GL11` to the compilation command line so that the compiled game supports OpenGL 1.1.

## Compiling - Windows

##### Using Visual Studio
Open ClassiCube.sln *(File -> Open -> Project/Solution)* and compile it *(Build -> Build Solution)*.

If you get a ```The Windows SDK version 5.1 was not found``` compilation error, [see here for how to fix](doc/compile-fixes.md#visual-studio-unsupported-platform-toolset)

##### Using Visual Studio (command line)
1. Use 'Developer Tools for Visual Studio' from Start Menu
2. Navigate to directory with game's source code
3. Enter `cl.exe *.c /link user32.lib gdi32.lib crypt32.lib ws2_32.lib wininet.lib winmm.lib dbghelp.lib shell32.lib comdlg32.lib /out:ClassiCube.exe`

##### Using MinGW-w64
I am assuming you used the installer from https://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw-w64/
1. Install MinGW-W64
2. Use either *Run Terminal* from Start Menu or run *mingw-w64.bat* in the installation folder
3. Navigate to directory with game's source code
4. Enter `gcc *.c -o ClassiCube.exe -mwindows -lwinmm -limagehlp`

##### Using MinGW
I am assuming you used the installer from http://www.mingw.org/
1. Install MinGW. You need mingw32-base-bin and msys-base-bin packages.
2. Run *msys.bat* in the *C:\MinGW\msys\1.0* folder.
3. Navigate to directory with game's source code
4. Enter `gcc *.c -o ClassiCube.exe -mwindows -lwinmm -limagehlp`

##### Using TCC
I am assuming you used `tcc-0.9.27-win64-bin.zip` from https://bellard.org/tcc/
1. Extract the .zip file
2. In `ExtMath.C`, change `fabsf` to `fabs` and `sqrtf` to `sqrtf`
3. In TCC's `include/math.h`, remove the inline definition for `fabs` at around line 217
4. In TCC's `lib/kernel32.def`, add missing `RtlCaptureContext`
5. Add missing include files from `winapi-full-for-0.9.27.zip` as required
6. ???

## Compiling - Linux

##### Using gcc/clang

Install appropriate libs as required. For ubuntu these are: libx11-dev, libxi-dev and libgl1-mesa-dev

```gcc *.c -o ClassiCube -rdynamic -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -ldl```

##### Cross compiling for Windows (32 bit):

```i686-w64-mingw32-gcc *.c -o ClassiCube.exe -mwindows -lwinmm -limagehlp```

##### Cross compiling for Windows (64 bit):

```x86_64-w64-mingw32-gcc *.c -o ClassiCube.exe -mwindows -lwinmm -limagehlp```

##### Raspberry Pi
Although the regular linux compiliation flags will work fine, to take full advantage of the hardware:

```gcc *.c -o ClassiCube -DCC_BUILD_RPI -rdynamic -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lEGL -lGLESv2 -ldl```

## Compiling - macOS

##### Using gcc/clang (32 bit)

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -framework Carbon -framework AGL -framework OpenGL -framework IOKit```

##### Using gcc/clang (64 bit)

```cc *.c interop_cocoa.m -o ClassiCube -framework Cocoa -framework OpenGL -framework IOKit -lobjc```

## Compiling - for Android

##### Using Android Studio GUI

Open `android` folder in Android Studio (TODO explain more detailed)

##### Using command line (gradle)

Run `gradlew` in android folder (TODO explain more detailed)

## Compiling - for iOS

iOS version will have issues as it's incomplete and only tested in iOS Simulator

##### Using Xcode GUI

Import `ios/CCIOS.xcodeproj` project into Xcode (TODO explain more detailed)

##### Using command line (Xcode)

`xcodebuild -sdk iphoneos -configuration Debug` (TODO explain more detailed)

## Compiling - other desktop OSes

#### FreeBSD

Install libexecinfo, curl and openal-soft package if needed

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -I /usr/local/include -L /usr/local/lib -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -lexecinfo```

#### OpenBSD

Install libexecinfo, curl and openal package if needed

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -I /usr/X11R6/include -I /usr/local/include -L /usr/X11R6/lib -L /usr/local/lib -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -lexecinfo```

#### NetBSD

Install libexecinfo, curl and openal-soft package if needed

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -I /usr/X11R7/include -I /usr/pkg/include -L /usr/X11R7/lib -L /usr/pkg/lib  -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -lexecinfo```

#### DragonflyBSD

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -I /usr/local/include -L /usr/local/lib -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -lexecinfo```

#### Solaris

```gcc *.c -o ClassiCube -lm -lsocket -lX11 -lXi -lGL```

#### Haiku

Install openal_devel and libexecinfo_devel package if needed

```cc *.c Window_Haiku.cpp -o ClassiCube -lm -lexecinfo -lGL -lnetwork -lstdc++ -lbe -lgame -ltracker```

#### SerenityOS

Install SDL2 port if needed

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -lgl -lSDL2```

## Compiling - other

#### Web

```emcc *.c -s ALLOW_MEMORY_GROWTH=1 --js-library interop_web.js```

The generated javascript file has some issues. [See here for how to fix](doc/compile-fixes.md#webclient-patches)

##### Other

You'll have to write the necessary code. You should read portability.md in doc folder.

## Documentation

Functions and variables in .h files are mostly documented.

Further information (e.g. style) for the game's source code can be found in the doc and misc folders.

#### Known compilation errors

[Fixes for compilation errors when using musl or old glibc for C standard library](doc/compile-fixes.md#common-compilation-errors)

#### Tips
* Press escape (after joining a world) or pause to switch to the pause menu.
* Pause menu -> Options -> Controls lists all of the key combinations used by the client. 
* Note that toggling 'vsync' to on will minimise CPU usage, while off will maximimise chunk loading speed.
* Press F to cycle view distance. A smaller number of visible chunks can improve performance.

* If the server has disabled hacks, key combinations such as fly and speed will not do anything.
* To see the list of built in commands, type `/client`.
* To see help for a given built in command, type `/client help <command name>`.


## Open source technologies

* [curl](https://curl.se/) - HTTP/HTTPS for linux and macOS
* [FreeType](https://www.freetype.org/) - Font handling for all platforms
* [GCC](https://gcc.gnu.org/) - Compiles client for linux
* [MinGW-w64](http://mingw-w64.org/doku.php) - Compiles client for windows
* [Clang](https://clang.llvm.org/) - Compiles client for macOS
* [Emscripten](https://emscripten.org/) - Compiles client for web
* [RenderDoc](https://renderdoc.org/) - graphics debugging

## Sound Credits
ClassiCube uses sounds from [Freesound.org](https://freesound.org)<br>
Full credits are listed in [doc/sound-credits.md](doc/sound-credits.md)

Commit message:

Add IRIX to Readme
Added Irix build command and build instructions to the readme.

also added IRIX x11 fonts, at line 810 and so on attempted to fix not being able to use the launcher to start singleplayer world and not able to join servers.

readme.md, after:

ClassiCube is a custom Minecraft Classic and ClassiCube client written in C that works on Windows, macOS, Linux, Android, iOS, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, Solaris, IRIX, Haiku, and in a web browser.<br>
**It is not affiliated with (or supported by) Mojang AB, Minecraft, or Microsoft in any way.**

![screenshot_n](http://i.imgur.com/FCiwl27.png)


You can download the game [from here](https://www.classicube.net/download/) and the very latest builds [from here](https://www.classicube.net/nightlies/).

## Information

#### What ClassiCube is
* A complete re-implementation of Minecraft Classic 0.30, with **optional** additions
* Lightweight, minimal memory usage compared to original Minecraft Classic
* Much better performance than original Minecraft Classic
* Works with effectively all graphics cards that support OpenGL or Direct3D 9

#### What ClassiCube isn't
* It does not work with Minecraft Java or Bedrock edition servers
* It does not have a survival mode (nor will such a mode be added)
* It does not reimplement Minecraft Classic versions before 0.30

#### System requirements
* Windows: 95 or later
* macOS: 10.5 or later (can be compiled to work with 10.3/10.4 though)
* Linux: libcurl and libopenal
* Android: 2.3 or later

**Note:** When running from within VirtualBox, disable Mouse Integration, otherwise the camera will not work properly

#### Instructions
Initially, you will need to run ClassiCube.exe to download the required assets from minecraft.net. 
Just click 'OK' to the dialog menu that appears when you start the launcher.

**Singleplayer**
Run ClassiCube.exe, then click Singleplayer at the main menu.

**Multiplayer**
Run ClassiCube.exe. You can connect to LAN/locally hosted servers, ~~minecraft.net servers,~~ and classicube.net servers through the launcher.

###### *Stuck with OpenGL 1.1 due to old graphics hardware?*
If you're on Windows, you should first try using the MESA software renderer from [here](http://download.qt.io/development_releases/prebuilt/llvmpipe/windows/). Typically though, this occurs because you have not installed GPU drivers.

Otherwise, you will have to [compile the game yourself](#using-visual-studio-command-line). Don't forget to add `-DCC_BUILD_GL11` to the compilation command line so that the compiled game supports OpenGL 1.1.

## Compiling - Windows

##### Using Visual Studio
Open ClassiCube.sln *(File -> Open -> Project/Solution)* and compile it *(Build -> Build Solution)*.

If you get a ```The Windows SDK version 5.1 was not found``` compilation error, [see here for how to fix](doc/compile-fixes.md#visual-studio-unsupported-platform-toolset)

##### Using Visual Studio (command line)
1. Use 'Developer Tools for Visual Studio' from Start Menu
2. Navigate to directory with game's source code
3. Enter `cl.exe *.c /link user32.lib gdi32.lib crypt32.lib ws2_32.lib wininet.lib winmm.lib dbghelp.lib shell32.lib comdlg32.lib /out:ClassiCube.exe`

##### Using MinGW-w64
I am assuming you used the installer from https://sourceforge.net/projects/mingw-w64/
1. Install MinGW-W64
2. Use either *Run Terminal* from Start Menu or run *mingw-w64.bat* in the installation folder
3. Navigate to directory with game's source code
4. Enter `gcc *.c -o ClassiCube.exe -mwindows -lwinmm -limagehlp`

##### Using MinGW
I am assuming you used the installer from http://www.mingw.org/
1. Install MinGW. You need mingw32-base-bin and msys-base-bin packages.
2. Run *msys.bat* in the *C:\MinGW\msys\1.0* folder.
3. Navigate to directory with game's source code
4. Enter `gcc *.c -o ClassiCube.exe -mwindows -lwinmm -limagehlp`

##### Using TCC
I am assuming you used `tcc-0.9.27-win64-bin.zip` from https://bellard.org/tcc/
1. Extract the .zip file
2. In `ExtMath.C`, change `fabsf` to `fabs` and `sqrtf` to `sqrtf`
3. In TCC's `include/math.h`, remove the inline definition for `fabs` at around line 217
4. In TCC's `lib/kernel32.def`, add missing `RtlCaptureContext`
5. Add missing include files from `winapi-full-for-0.9.27.zip` as required
6. ???

## Compiling - Linux

##### Using gcc/clang

Install appropriate libs as required. For ubuntu these are: libx11-dev, libxi-dev and libgl1-mesa-dev

```gcc *.c -o ClassiCube -rdynamic -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -ldl```

##### Cross compiling for Windows (32 bit):

```i686-w64-mingw32-gcc *.c -o ClassiCube.exe -mwindows -lwinmm -limagehlp```

##### Cross compiling for Windows (64 bit):

```x86_64-w64-mingw32-gcc *.c -o ClassiCube.exe -mwindows -lwinmm -limagehlp```

##### Raspberry Pi
Although the regular linux compiliation flags will work fine, to take full advantage of the hardware:

```gcc *.c -o ClassiCube -DCC_BUILD_RPI -rdynamic -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lEGL -lGLESv2 -ldl```

## Compiling - macOS

##### Using gcc/clang (32 bit)

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -framework Carbon -framework AGL -framework OpenGL -framework IOKit```

##### Using gcc/clang (64 bit)

```cc *.c interop_cocoa.m -o ClassiCube -framework Cocoa -framework OpenGL -framework IOKit -lobjc```

## Compiling - for Android

##### Using Android Studio GUI

Open `android` folder in Android Studio (TODO explain more detailed)

##### Using command line (gradle)

Run `gradlew` in android folder (TODO explain more detailed)

## Compiling - for iOS

iOS version will have issues as it's incomplete and only tested in iOS Simulator

##### Using Xcode GUI

Import `ios/CCIOS.xcodeproj` project into Xcode (TODO explain more detailed)

##### Using command line (Xcode)

`xcodebuild -sdk iphoneos -configuration Debug` (TODO explain more detailed)

## Compiling - other desktop OSes

#### FreeBSD

Install libexecinfo, curl and openal-soft package if needed

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -I /usr/local/include -L /usr/local/lib -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -lexecinfo```

#### OpenBSD

Install libexecinfo, curl and openal package if needed

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -I /usr/X11R6/include -I /usr/local/include -L /usr/X11R6/lib -L /usr/local/lib -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -lexecinfo```

#### NetBSD

Install libexecinfo, curl and openal-soft package if needed

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -I /usr/X11R7/include -I /usr/pkg/include -L /usr/X11R7/lib -L /usr/pkg/lib  -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -lexecinfo```

#### DragonflyBSD

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -I /usr/local/include -L /usr/local/lib -lm -lpthread -lX11 -lXi -lGL -lexecinfo```

#### Solaris

```gcc *.c -o ClassiCube -lm -lsocket -lX11 -lXi -lGL```

#### IRIX

Install Sgug-RSE (https://github.com/sgidevnet/sgug-rse) for GCC 9.2 and libs. Install Nekoware OpenAL (neko_openal-1.1.tardist) for Audio (Can severaly impact performace due the lack of .ogg decoding on SGI hardware. Add '''-DCC_BUILD_NOMUSIC -DCC_BUILD_NOSOUND''' to the build command to exclude audio).  

```gcc *.c -o ClassiCube -Wl,-rpath-link=/usr/lib32 -Wl,-rpath=/usr/lib32:/usr/sgug/lib32 -lX11 -lGL -lGLcore -lGLU -lpthread -Wl,--allow-shlib-undefined -DCC_BUILD_GL11```

#### Haiku

Install openal_devel and libexecinfo_devel package if needed

```cc *.c Window_Haiku.cpp -o ClassiCube -lm -lexecinfo -lGL -lnetwork -lstdc++ -lbe -lgame -ltracker```

#### SerenityOS

Install SDL2 port if needed

```cc *.c -o ClassiCube -lgl -lSDL2```

## Compiling - other

#### Web

```emcc *.c -s ALLOW_MEMORY_GROWTH=1 --js-library interop_web.js```

The generated javascript file has some issues. [See here for how to fix](doc/compile-fixes.md#webclient-patches)

##### Other

You'll have to write the necessary code. You should read portability.md in doc folder.

## Documentation

Functions and variables in .h files are mostly documented.

Further information (e.g. style) for the game's source code can be found in the doc and misc folders.

#### Known compilation errors

[Fixes for compilation errors when using musl or old glibc for C standard library](doc/compile-fixes.md#common-compilation-errors)

#### Tips
* Press escape (after joining a world) or pause to switch to the pause menu.
* Pause menu -> Options -> Controls lists all of the key combinations used by the client. 
* Note that toggling 'vsync' to on will minimise CPU usage, while off will maximimise chunk loading speed.
* Press F to cycle view distance. A smaller number of visible chunks can improve performance.

* If the server has disabled hacks, key combinations such as fly and speed will not do anything.
* To see the list of built in commands, type `/client`.
* To see help for a given built in command, type `/client help <command name>`.


## Open source technologies

* [curl](https://curl.se/) - HTTP/HTTPS for linux and macOS
* [FreeType](https://www.freetype.org/) - Font handling for all platforms
* [GCC](https://gcc.gnu.org/) - Compiles client for linux
* [MinGW-w64](http://mingw-w64.org/doku.php) - Compiles client for windows
* [Clang](https://clang.llvm.org/) - Compiles client for macOS
* [Emscripten](https://emscripten.org/) - Compiles client for web
* [RenderDoc](https://renderdoc.org/) - graphics debugging

## Sound Credits
ClassiCube uses sounds from [Freesound.org](https://freesound.org)<br>
Full credits are listed in [doc/sound-credits.md](doc/sound-credits.md)
